CTP/doc/ha_shell/ha_shell_guide.md, before:

# HA Shell Test Guide
# 1 Test Introduction
HA Shell test suit is used to test CUBRID HA features.  
To run a HA shell case, we usually need at least two machines. But sometimes, we need more than two machines.  
So HA shell test is divided to two categories:    
1. The HA shell cases which can be run on two machines. The cases are put in 'HA' case path. And these cases are executed for each CI build.  
2. The other HA shell cases. The cases are put in 'shell_ext' path. And these cases are usually run before a release.  

In this document, I will only introduce the first kind of test. And this kind of test is almost the same as shell test.  
For the second kind of test, it will be introduced in shell_ext test guide.  

# 2 Tools Introduction
CTP is the only test tool which is used to execute HA shell test cases.   
Source URL: [https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools)

## 2.1 Quick Start
1. Install CUBRID
Please follow CUBRID installation guide to install CUBRID on both master node and slave node. Suppose that we install CUBRID at $HOME/CUBRID. Then add this line `'source .cubrid.sh'` in `~/.bash_profile`:
```
source .cubrid.sh
```

2. Check out HA shell cases
```
cd ~
git clone https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testcases-private.git
cd ~/cubrid-testcases-private 
git checkout develop
```

3. Install CTP
Please refer to ["CTP Installation Guide"](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/ctp_install_guide.md#1-install-ctp-in-linux-platform).     
Then create configuration file as below:  
*~/CTP/conf/shell.conf* 
```
# These parameters are used to set cubrid.conf, cubrid_broker.conf and cubrid_ha.conf
# We can add the parameters as needed.
# For example, if we need change set 'error_log_size = 800000000', just need add line 'default.cubrid.error_log_size = 800000000' here.
default.cubrid.cubrid_port_id=1568
default.broker1.BROKER_PORT=10090
default.broker1.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=10090
default.broker2.BROKER_PORT=13091
default.broker2.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=13091
default.ha.ha_port_id=19909

#specify the master node and slave node
env.83.ssh.host=192.168.1.83
env.83.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.93

# Specify the case path and exclude list file
# We can also specify a sub path under the test case path to run a sub set of the test cases.
scenario=${HOME}/cubrid-testcases-private-ex/shell
testcase_exclude_from_file=${HOME}/cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/config/daily_regression_test_excluded_list_linux.conf

# When the test is interrupted and started again, we can choose whether to run it continuously or re-run it.
test_continue_yn=false

testcase_timeout_in_secs=604800

# When the case is failed, we can re-run it. This paramter specify the max time we want to re-run the failed case.
testcase_retry_num=0

# Some times there is not enough disk space on the test machine, so we need to delete all the files under the test case path after the case is run.
delete_testcase_after_each_execution_yn=false
enable_check_disk_space_yn=true
owner_email=cui.man@navercorp.com

# set test result feed back type: file or database
feedback_type=file
```

4. Start test
```
cd ~/CTP/bin
nohup ./ctp.sh shell -c ~/CTP/conf/shell.conf &
```

## 2.2 CTP Usage Introduction
Please refer to shell_guide: [CTP Usage Introduction](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/shell_guide.md#22-ctp-usage-introduction)

## 2.3 Execute A Single Test Case
Please refer to shell_guide: [Execute A Single Test Case](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/shell_guide.md#23-execute-a-single-test-case)


# 3 Regression Test Deployment
## 3.1 Test Machines
|Role|Master or Slave|User|IP|Hostname|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|controller node|NA|controller|192.168.1.83|func08|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.83|func08|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.93|func18|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.84|func09|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.94|func19|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.85|func10|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.95|func20|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.87|func12|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.97|func22|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.88|func13|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.92|func17|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.89|func14|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.96|func21|

## 3.2 Create and Set Users  
### Controller Node
We need create a new user `'controller'`.  
Then login root user and execute:  
```
sudo useradd controller
```
Set password as our common password for user controller.  
```
sudo passwd controller
```
 Set the user's password to never expire.  
 ```
 sudo chage -E 2999-1-1 -m 0 -M 99999 controller
 ```
**Note**: HA shell test and isalotion test share the same controller node.  

### Worker Nodes
We need create a new user `'ha'`.  
Login root user and execute:  
```
sudo useradd ha
```
Set password as our common password for user ha.  
```
sudo passwd ha
```
 Set user's password to never expire.  
 ```
 sudo chage -E 2999-1-1 -m 0 -M 99999 ha
 ```

## 3.3 Install Software Packages
Required software packages:    

|software|version|usage|  
|---|---|---|  
|jdk|1.8.0 (need larger than 1.6)|run CTP, run shell test case|  
|lcov|lcov-1.11|run code coverage test|  
|bc|latest version|run shell test case|  

## 3.4 Deploy controller node
1. Install CTP   
Please refer to ["CTP Installation Guide"](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/ctp_install_guide.md#3-install-ctp-as-regression-test-platform)

2. Set shell configure file  
`~/CTP/conf/shell_template.conf`: 
```
default.ssh.port=22
default.ssh.user=ha
default.ssh.pwd=uV9b3KMp5%%
default.cubrid.cubrid_port_id = 1568
default.broker1.BROKER_PORT = 30090
default.broker2.BROKER_PORT = 33091
default.broker1.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=30090
default.broker2.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=33091
default.ha.ha_port_id = 59907

env.83.ssh.host=192.168.1.83
env.83.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.93

env.84.ssh.host=192.168.1.84
env.84.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.94

env.85.ssh.host=192.168.1.85
env.85.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.95

env.87.ssh.host=192.168.1.87
env.87.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.97

env.88.ssh.host=192.168.1.88
env.88.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.92

env.89.ssh.host=192.168.1.89
env.89.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.96

test_continue_yn=false
scenario=$HOME/cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell
testcase_exclude_from_file=$HOME/cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/config/daily_regression_test_excluded_list_linux.conf
testcase_git_branch=develop

testcase_timeout_in_secs=604800
testcase_update_yn=true
test_platform=linux
test_category=ha_shell
testcase_retry_num=0
ignore_core_by_keywords=
owner_email=cui.man@navercorp.com
enable_check_disk_space_yn=true

feedback_type=database
feedback_db_host=192.168.1.86
feedback_db_port=33080
feedback_db_name=qaresu
feedback_db_user=dba
feedback_db_pwd=
feedback_notice_qahome_url=http://192.168.1.86:6060/qaresult/shellImportAction.nhn?main_id=<MAINID>
```
shell_template.conf will be copied to ~/CTP/conf/shell_runtime.conf when test is started.  

3. Set `~/.bash_profile`  
Set `~/.bash_profile` like this:  
```
# .bash_profile

# Get the aliases and functions
if [ -f ~/.bashrc ]; then
        . ~/.bashrc
fi

# User specific environment and startup programs

PATH=$JAVA_HOME/bin:$HOME/CTP/common/script:$PATH:$HOME/.local/bin:$HOME/bin

export PATH

export CTP_BRANCH_NAME="develop"
export CTP_SKIP_UPDATE=0
```

4. Create a script to start consumer
~/start_test.sh
```
nohup start_consumer.sh -q QUEUE_CUBRID_QA_CC_BASIC,QUEUE_CUBRID_QA_SHELL_HA_LINUX -exec run_isolation,run_shell &
```
**Note**: HA shell test and isalotion test share the same controller node.

## 3.5 Deploy Worker Nodes  
1. Install CTP
Please refer to ["CTP Installation Guide"](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/ctp_install_guide.md#3-install-ctp-as-regression-test-platform)

2. Set `~/.bash_profile`  
Set `~/.bash_profile` like this:  
```
# .bash_profile

# Get the aliases and functions
if [ -f ~/.bashrc ]; then
        . ~/.bashrc
fi

# User specific environment and startup programs

PATH=$PATH:$HOME/.local/bin:$HOME/bin

export CTP_HOME=$HOME/CTP
## init_path is used when we run shell case manually on this machine.
export init_path=$CTP_HOME/shell/init_path

export PATH=$CTP_HOME/bin:$CTP_HOME/common/script:$PATH

export CTP_BRANCH_NAME="develop"
export CTP_SKIP_UPDATE=0

. ~/.cubrid.sh
export GCOV_PREFIX=/home/shell
export GCOV_PREFIX_STRIP=2
ulimit -c unlimited
```

3. Deploy test cases
```
git clone --no-checkout https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testcases-private.git
cd ~/cubrid-testcases-private
git config core.sparseCheckout true
echo 'HA/*' > ~/cubrid-testcases-private/.git/info/sparse-checkout
git checkout develop
```

4. Make directories for test
```
cd
mkdir do_not_delete_core
mkdir ERROR_BACKUP
```

5. Add `.cubrid.sh` file   
If cubrid has never been installed on the machine, we need add file `'.cubrid.sh'` at $HOME path manually.  

## 3.6 Start Consumer
On controller node, execute the script `start_test.sh` to start listening the test message after deployment.  
This will start a HA shell test when the consumer receives the test message.
```
cd ~
sh start_test.sh
```

# 4 Regression Test Sustaining
Please refer to shell guide: [Regression Test Sustaining](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/shell_guide.md#4-regression-test-sustaining)  

## HA Shell Test Message
 
```
sender.sh QUEUE_CUBRID_QA_SHELL_HA_LINUX http://192.168.1.91:8080/REPO_ROOT/store_01/10.2.0.8330-d4d8464/drop/CUBRID-10.2.0.8330-d4d8464-Linux.x86_64.sh ha_shell default
```
## Code Coverage Test Message
```
sender.sh QUEUE_CUBRID_QA_SHELL_HA_LINUX "http://192.168.1.91:8080/REPO_ROOT/store_01/10.2.0.8270-c897055/drop/CUBRID-10.2.0.8270-c897055-gcov-Linux.x86_64.tar.gz,http://192.168.1.91:8080/REPO_ROOT/store_01/10.2.0.8270-c897055/drop/cubrid-10.2.0.8270-c897055-gcov-src-Linux.x86_64.tar.gz" ha_shell default
```

# 5 HA shell case standards
HA shell case is a special kind of shell test case. It should fowllow all the shell test case standards.   
For shell case standards, please refer to shell test guide.   
In this section, I will only introduce the contents which are not included in shell test guide.  

## 5.1 Case Path Standard
A HA shell test case should follow the following structure:   
```
/path/to/test_name/cases/test_name.sh
``` 
### Test Cases Added for New Features 
When we need add a test case for a feature test, add a case to path like this:  
```
cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/_{no}_{release_code}/cbrd_xxxxx_{feature}/
```
with naming rules:
```
structured_name_1/cases/structured_name_1.sh
structured_name_2/cases/structured_name_2.sh
```

Example:
```
cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/_31_cherry/issue_21506_online_index
cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/_31_cherry/issue_21506_online_index/cbrd_21506_01/cases/cbrd_21506_01.sh
```

### Test Cases Added for Jira Issues
When add a test case for a bug fix, add a case to path:  
```
cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/_12_bts_issue/_{yy}_{1|2}h/
```
with naming rules:
```
cbrd_xxxxx/cases/cbrd_xxxxx.sh
cbrd_xxxxx_1/cases/cbrd_xxxxx_1.sh
cbrd_xxxxx_{issue_key}/cases/cbrd_xxxxx_{issue_keyword}.sh
```
Example:
```
cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/_12_bts_issue/_19_2h/cbrd_22207/cases/cbrd_22207.sh
```

## 5.2 HA Shell Case Template
```
#!/bin/sh
# Initialize the environment variables, and import all the functions. 
. $init_path/init.sh
. $init_path/make_ha.sh

init test
setup_ha_environment

# Test steps

# Check the result
if [condition]
then
       write_ok
else
       write_nok
fi

revert_ha_environment

# Clean environment, such as delete the jave class files

# 'finish' is a function in init.sh, which will revert all the conf files to the original status.
finish
```
 
`'make_ha.sh'` will source make_ha_upper.sh( >=8.4) or make_ha_lower.sh( <8.4) according to cubrid versions.
```
if [ $is_R40 -eq 1 ]; then
        . $init_path/make_ha_upper.sh
else
        . $init_path/make_ha_lower.sh
fi
```
`make_ha_upper.sh` and `make_ha_lower.sh` contain all the common functions for ha shell test cases.  

## 5.4 Functions/Alias in `'ha_common.sh'`
ha_common.sh will be sourced in make_ha_upper.sh:  
```
source $init_path/ha_common.sh
```
### wait_for_active
Wait server 'hatestdb' to be changed to active mode on current node.  
If the server is changed to active to active mode whthin 120 seconds, the wait loop will break.   
Otherwise, this function will print "NOK: db server is not active after long time".  
This is usually used before we update data in hatestdb.

### wait_for_slave_active
Wait server 'hatestdb' to be changed to active mode on slave node.  
If the server is changed to active to active mode whthin 120 seconds, the wait loop will break.   
Otherwise, this function will print "NOK: db server is not active after long time".  
This is usually used after a failover.  

### run_on_slave
```
alias run_on_slave='${init_path}/../../common/script/run_remote_script -host $SLAVE_SERVER_IP -port $SLAVE_SERVER_SSH_PORT -user $SLAVE_SERVER_USER -password "$SLAVE_SERVER_PW"'
```
Examples:
```
run_on_slave -c "cubrid hb stop"
run_on_slave -c "grep 'Process event: Encountered an unrecoverable error and will shut itself down' $CUBRID/log/${dbname}@${masterHostName}_copylogdb.err | wc -l"
run_on_slave -c "cd $HOME; sh monitor_bug_11301.sh $dbname $masterHostName $port" > slave.log 2>&1
```
### run_download_on_slave
```
alias run_download_on_slave='${init_path}/../../common/script/run_download -host $SLAVE_SERVER_IP -port $SLAVE_SERVER_SSH_PORT -user $SLAVE_SERVER_USER -password "$SLAVE_SERVER_PW"'
```
Examples:
```
run_download_on_slave -from ~/slave.log -to ./
run_download_on_slave -from $CUBRID/log/hatestdb@${masterHostName}_copylogdb.err -to .
```

### run_upload_on_slave
```
alias run_upload_on_slave='${init_path}/../../common/script/run_upload -host $SLAVE_SERVER_IP -port $SLAVE_SERVER_SSH_PORT -user $SLAVE_SERVER_USER -password "$SLAVE_SERVER_PW"'
```
Examples:
```
run_upload_on_slave -from $CUBRID/conf/cubrid.conf -to $CUBRID/conf/
run_upload_on_slave -from ./monitor_bug_11301.sh -to $HOME/
```

## 5.5 Functions in make_ha_upper.sh or make_ha_lower.sh  

### setup_ha_environment  
`setup_ha_environment` is used to setup a HA environment which contains one master node, and one slave node.  
The current machine is used as the master node, and slave node is set in ~/CTP/shell/init_path/HA.properties.  
Example for HA.properties:  
```
##Configure HA enviorment.

MASTER_SERVER_IP = 192.168.1.83
MASTER_SERVER_USER = ha
MASTER_SERVER_PW = PASSWORD
MASTER_SERVER_SSH_PORT = 22
SLAVE_SERVER_IP = 192.168.1.93
SLAVE_SERVER_USER = ha
SLAVE_SERVER_PW = PASSWORD
SLAVE_SERVER_SSH_PORT = 22
#set port numbers according to different users
CUBRID_PORT_ID = 1568
HA_PORT_ID = 59907
MASTER_SHM_ID = 1568
BROKER_PORT1 = 30090
APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID1 = 30090
BROKER_PORT2 = 33091
APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID2 = 33091
CM_PORT = 8001
```
If we need to run a HA shell, we need configure `'HA.properties'` first.  
In regression test,  file `'HA.properties'` is configured by CTP.  
CTP read info from file `'~/CTP/conf/shell_runtime.conf'` on controller node, and set file `'$init_path/HA.properties'` on each master node. 

For example:  
File `'$init_path/HA.properties'` on node ha@192.168.1.83:
```
##Configure HA enviorment.

MASTER_SERVER_IP = 192.168.1.83
MASTER_SERVER_USER = ha
MASTER_SERVER_PW = PASSWORD
MASTER_SERVER_SSH_PORT = 22
SLAVE_SERVER_IP = 192.168.1.93
SLAVE_SERVER_USER = ha
SLAVE_SERVER_PW = PASSWORD
SLAVE_SERVER_SSH_PORT = 22
#set port numbers according to different users
CUBRID_PORT_ID = 1568
HA_PORT_ID = 59907
MASTER_SHM_ID = 1568
BROKER_PORT1 = 30090
APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID1 = 30090
BROKER_PORT2 = 33091
APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID2 = 33091
CM_PORT = 8001

```
This is depended on file `~/CTP/conf/shell_template.conf` on controller node:  


```
default.ssh.port=22
default.ssh.user=ha
default.ssh.pwd=uV9b3KMp5%%
default.cubrid.cubrid_port_id = 1568
default.broker1.BROKER_PORT = 30090
default.broker2.BROKER_PORT = 33091
default.broker1.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=30090
default.broker2.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=33091
default.ha.ha_port_id = 59907

#master node
env.83.ssh.host=192.168.1.83
#slave node
env.83.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.93
...
```

### revert_ha_environment  
* Revert all the conf files to the original status on master node and slave node.
* Delete db on both nodes.

### wait_for_slave
`wait_for_slave` is used to wait the data replication finished on slave node.
If we need to check the data on slave node, we need to check the data after the data replication finished. So this function is required.

### wait_for_slave_failover  
When a failover occurs, we need use function `wait_for_slave_failover` to wait the new slave node (previous master node) to finish the data replication before we check the data.

### format_hb_status
`format_hb_status` is used to format the hostname, process id, path for 'cubrid hb status' output.  
Usage:
```
cubrid hb status > test.log
format_hb_status test.log
```
Before format:
```
$ cat test.log 

 HA-Node Info (current func09, state master)
   Node func19 (priority 2, state slave)
   Node func09 (priority 1, state master)


 HA-Process Info (master 12167, state master)
   Applylogdb hatestdb@localhost:/home/ha/CUBRID/databases/hatestdb_func19 (pid 12407, state registered)
   Copylogdb hatestdb@func19:/home/ha/CUBRID/databases/hatestdb_func19 (pid 12405, state registered)
   Server hatestdb (pid 12175, state registered_and_active)

@ cubrid heartbeat status
```
After format:
```
$ cat test.log             

 HA-Node Info (current host1, state master)
   Node host2 (priority 2, state slave)
   Node host1 (priority 1, state master)


 HA-Process Info (master , state master)
   Applylogdb hatestdb@localhost:CUBRID/databases/hatestdb_host2 (pid , state registered)
   Copylogdb hatestdb@host2:CUBRID/databases/hatestdb_host2 (pid , state registered)
   Server hatestdb (pid , state registered_and_active)

@ cubrid heartbeat status
```
### add_ha_db
`add_ha_db` is used to add new database after `setup_ha_environment`.  
* Create database on master node and slave node.  
* Add the database name in ha_db_list in $CUBRID/conf/cubrid_ha.conf  
* Restart the heartbeat on both nodes  
Example:  
Three databases will be created in this case: tdb01, tdb02 and tdb03. 
```
#!/bin/bash

. $init_path/init.sh
init test

. $init_path/make_ha.sh
dbname=tdb01
setup_ha_environment
add_ha_db tdb02 tdb03
```

Commit message:

[CUBRIDQA-956] refine HA shell test guide as shell guide

CTP/doc/ha_shell/ha_shell_guide.md, after:

# HA Shell Test Guide
# 1 Test Introduction
HA Shell test suit is used to test CUBRID HA features.  
To run a HA shell case, we usually need at least two machines. But sometimes, we need more than two machines.  
So HA shell test is divided to two categories:    
1. The HA shell cases which can be run on two machines. The cases are put in 'HA' case path. And these cases are executed for each CI build.  
2. The other HA shell cases. The cases are put in 'shell_ext' path. And these cases are usually run before a release.  

In this document, I will only introduce the first kind of test. And this kind of test is almost the same as shell test.  
For the second kind of test, it will be introduced in shell_ext test guide.  
Additionally, HA shell test is also a part of code coverage test.  

# 2 Tools Introduction
CTP is the only test tool which is used to execute HA shell test cases.   
Source URL: [https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools)

## 2.1 Quick Start
1. Install CUBRID
Please follow CUBRID installation guide to install CUBRID on both master node and slave node. Suppose that we install CUBRID at $HOME/CUBRID. Then add this line `'source .cubrid.sh'` in `~/.bash_profile`:
```
source .cubrid.sh
```

2. Check out HA shell cases
```
cd ~
git clone https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testcases-private.git
cd ~/cubrid-testcases-private 
git checkout develop
```

3. Install CTP
Please refer to ["CTP Installation Guide"](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/ctp_install_guide.md#1-install-ctp-in-linux-platform).     
Then create configuration file as below:  
*~/CTP/conf/shell.conf* 
```
# These parameters are used to set cubrid.conf, cubrid_broker.conf and cubrid_ha.conf
# We can add the parameters as needed.
# For example, if we need change set 'error_log_size = 800000000', just need add line 'default.cubrid.error_log_size = 800000000' here.
default.cubrid.cubrid_port_id=1568
default.broker1.BROKER_PORT=10090
default.broker1.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=10090
default.broker2.BROKER_PORT=13091
default.broker2.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=13091
default.ha.ha_port_id=19909

#specify the master node and slave node
env.83.ssh.host=192.168.1.83
env.83.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.93

# Specify the case path and exclude list file
# We can also specify a sub path under the test case path to run a sub set of the test cases.
scenario=${HOME}/cubrid-testcases-private-ex/shell
testcase_exclude_from_file=${HOME}/cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/config/daily_regression_test_excluded_list_linux.conf

# When the test is interrupted and started again, we can choose whether to run it continuously or re-run it.
test_continue_yn=false

testcase_timeout_in_secs=604800

# When the case is failed, we can re-run it. This paramter specify the max time we want to re-run the failed case.
testcase_retry_num=0

# Some times there is not enough disk space on the test machine, so we need to delete all the files under the test case path after the case is run.
delete_testcase_after_each_execution_yn=false
enable_check_disk_space_yn=true
owner_email=cui.man@navercorp.com

# set test result feed back type: file or database
feedback_type=file
```

4. Start test
```
cd ~/CTP/bin
nohup ./ctp.sh shell -c ~/CTP/conf/shell.conf &
```

## 2.2 CTP Usage Introduction
Please refer to shell_guide: [CTP Usage Introduction](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/shell_guide.md#22-ctp-usage-introduction)

## 2.3 Execute A Single Test Case
Please refer to shell_guide: [Execute A Single Test Case](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/shell_guide.md#23-execute-a-single-test-case)


# 3 Regression Test Deployment
## 3.1 Test Machines
|Role|Master or Slave|User|IP|Hostname|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|controller node|NA|controller|192.168.1.83|func08|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.83|func08|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.93|func18|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.84|func09|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.94|func19|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.85|func10|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.95|func20|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.87|func12|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.97|func22|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.88|func13|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.92|func17|
|worker node|master|ha|192.168.1.89|func14|
|worker node|slave|ha|192.168.1.96|func21|

## 3.2 Create and Set Users  
### Controller Node
We need create a new user `'controller'`.  
Then login root user and execute:  
```
sudo useradd controller
```
Set password as our common password for user controller.  
```
sudo passwd controller
```
 Set the user's password to never expire.  
 ```
 sudo chage -E 2999-1-1 -m 0 -M 99999 controller
 ```
**Note**: HA shell test and isalotion test share the same controller node.  

### Worker Nodes
We need create a new user `'ha'`.  
Login root user and execute:  
```
sudo useradd ha
```
Set password as our common password for user ha.  
```
sudo passwd ha
```
 Set user's password to never expire.  
 ```
 sudo chage -E 2999-1-1 -m 0 -M 99999 ha
 ```

## 3.3 Install Software Packages
Required software packages:    

|software|version|usage|  
|---|---|---|  
|jdk|1.8.0 (need larger than 1.6)|run CTP, run shell test case|  
|lcov|lcov-1.11|run code coverage test|  
|bc|latest version|run shell test case|  

## 3.4 Deploy controller node
1. Install CTP   
Please refer to ["CTP Installation Guide"](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/ctp_install_guide.md#3-install-ctp-as-regression-test-platform)

2. Set shell configure file  
`~/CTP/conf/shell_template.conf`: 
```
default.ssh.port=22
default.ssh.user=ha
default.ssh.pwd=uV9b3KMp5%%
default.cubrid.cubrid_port_id = 1568
default.broker1.BROKER_PORT = 30090
default.broker2.BROKER_PORT = 33091
default.broker1.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=30090
default.broker2.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=33091
default.ha.ha_port_id = 59907

env.83.ssh.host=192.168.1.83
env.83.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.93

env.84.ssh.host=192.168.1.84
env.84.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.94

env.85.ssh.host=192.168.1.85
env.85.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.95

env.87.ssh.host=192.168.1.87
env.87.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.97

env.88.ssh.host=192.168.1.88
env.88.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.92

env.89.ssh.host=192.168.1.89
env.89.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.96

test_continue_yn=false
scenario=$HOME/cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell
testcase_exclude_from_file=$HOME/cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/config/daily_regression_test_excluded_list_linux.conf
testcase_git_branch=develop

testcase_timeout_in_secs=604800
testcase_update_yn=true
test_platform=linux
test_category=ha_shell
testcase_retry_num=0
ignore_core_by_keywords=
owner_email=cui.man@navercorp.com
enable_check_disk_space_yn=true

feedback_type=database
feedback_db_host=192.168.1.86
feedback_db_port=33080
feedback_db_name=qaresu
feedback_db_user=dba
feedback_db_pwd=
feedback_notice_qahome_url=http://192.168.1.86:6060/qaresult/shellImportAction.nhn?main_id=<MAINID>
```
shell_template.conf will be copied to ~/CTP/conf/shell_runtime.conf when test is started.  

3. Set `~/.bash_profile`  
Set `~/.bash_profile` like this:  
```
# .bash_profile

# Get the aliases and functions
if [ -f ~/.bashrc ]; then
        . ~/.bashrc
fi

# User specific environment and startup programs

PATH=$JAVA_HOME/bin:$HOME/CTP/common/script:$PATH:$HOME/.local/bin:$HOME/bin

export PATH

export CTP_BRANCH_NAME="develop"
export CTP_SKIP_UPDATE=0
```

4. Create a script to start consumer
~/start_test.sh
```
nohup start_consumer.sh -q QUEUE_CUBRID_QA_CC_BASIC,QUEUE_CUBRID_QA_SHELL_HA_LINUX -exec run_isolation,run_shell &
```
**Note**: HA shell test and isalotion test share the same controller node.

## 3.5 Deploy Worker Nodes  
1. Install CTP
Please refer to ["CTP Installation Guide"](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/ctp_install_guide.md#3-install-ctp-as-regression-test-platform)

2. Set `~/.bash_profile`  
Set `~/.bash_profile` like this:  
```
# .bash_profile

# Get the aliases and functions
if [ -f ~/.bashrc ]; then
        . ~/.bashrc
fi

# User specific environment and startup programs

PATH=$PATH:$HOME/.local/bin:$HOME/bin

export CTP_HOME=$HOME/CTP
## init_path is used when we run shell case manually on this machine.
export init_path=$CTP_HOME/shell/init_path

export PATH=$CTP_HOME/bin:$CTP_HOME/common/script:$PATH

export CTP_BRANCH_NAME="develop"
export CTP_SKIP_UPDATE=0

. ~/.cubrid.sh
export GCOV_PREFIX=/home/shell
export GCOV_PREFIX_STRIP=2
ulimit -c unlimited
```

3. Deploy test cases
```
git clone --no-checkout https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testcases-private.git
cd ~/cubrid-testcases-private
git config core.sparseCheckout true
echo 'HA/*' > ~/cubrid-testcases-private/.git/info/sparse-checkout
git checkout develop
```

4. Make directories for test
```
cd
mkdir do_not_delete_core
mkdir ERROR_BACKUP
```

5. Add `.cubrid.sh` file   
If cubrid has never been installed on the machine, we need add file `'.cubrid.sh'` at $HOME path manually.  

## 3.6 Start Consumer
On controller node, execute the script `start_test.sh` to start listening the test message after deployment.  
This will start a HA shell test when the consumer receives the test message.
```
cd ~
sh start_test.sh
```

# 4 Regression Test Sustaining
Please refer to shell guide: [Regression Test Sustaining](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/shell_guide.md#4-regression-test-sustaining)  

## HA Shell Test Message
 
```
sender.sh QUEUE_CUBRID_QA_SHELL_HA_LINUX http://192.168.1.91:8080/REPO_ROOT/store_01/10.2.0.8330-d4d8464/drop/CUBRID-10.2.0.8330-d4d8464-Linux.x86_64.sh ha_shell default
```
## Code Coverage Test Message
```
sender.sh QUEUE_CUBRID_QA_SHELL_HA_LINUX "http://192.168.1.91:8080/REPO_ROOT/store_01/10.2.0.8270-c897055/drop/CUBRID-10.2.0.8270-c897055-gcov-Linux.x86_64.tar.gz,http://192.168.1.91:8080/REPO_ROOT/store_01/10.2.0.8270-c897055/drop/cubrid-10.2.0.8270-c897055-gcov-src-Linux.x86_64.tar.gz" ha_shell default
```

# 5 HA shell case standards
HA shell case is a special kind of shell test case. It should fowllow all the shell test case standards.   
For shell case standards, please refer to shell test guide.   
In this section, I will only introduce the contents which are not included in shell test guide.  

## 5.1 Case Path Standard
A HA shell test case should follow the following structure:   
```
/path/to/test_name/cases/test_name.sh
``` 
### Test Cases Added for New Features 
When we need add a test case for a feature test, add a case to path like this:  
```
cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/_{no}_{release_code}/cbrd_xxxxx_{feature}/
```
with naming rules:
```
structured_name_1/cases/structured_name_1.sh
structured_name_2/cases/structured_name_2.sh
```

Example:
```
cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/_31_cherry/issue_21506_online_index
cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/_31_cherry/issue_21506_online_index/cbrd_21506_01/cases/cbrd_21506_01.sh
```

### Test Cases Added for Jira Issues
When add a test case for a bug fix, add a case to path:  
```
cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/_12_bts_issue/_{yy}_{1|2}h/
```
with naming rules:
```
cbrd_xxxxx/cases/cbrd_xxxxx.sh
cbrd_xxxxx_1/cases/cbrd_xxxxx_1.sh
cbrd_xxxxx_{issue_key}/cases/cbrd_xxxxx_{issue_keyword}.sh
```
Example:
```
cubrid-testcases-private/HA/shell/_12_bts_issue/_19_2h/cbrd_22207/cases/cbrd_22207.sh
```

## 5.2 HA Shell Case Template
```
#!/bin/sh
# Initialize the environment variables, and import all the functions. 
. $init_path/init.sh
. $init_path/make_ha.sh

init test
setup_ha_environment

# Test steps

# Check the result
if [condition]
then
       write_ok
else
       write_nok
fi

revert_ha_environment

# Clean environment, such as delete the jave class files

# 'finish' is a function in init.sh, which will revert all the conf files to the original status.
finish
```
 
`'make_ha.sh'` will source make_ha_upper.sh( >=8.4) or make_ha_lower.sh( <8.4) according to cubrid versions.
```
if [ $is_R40 -eq 1 ]; then
        . $init_path/make_ha_upper.sh
else
        . $init_path/make_ha_lower.sh
fi
```
`make_ha_upper.sh` and `make_ha_lower.sh` contain all the common functions for ha shell test cases.  

## 5.3 `'cubrid'` Script
Please refer to shell guide: ['cubrid' Script](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-testtools/blob/develop/doc/shell_guide.md#53-cubrid-script)  

## 5.4 Functions/Alias in `'ha_common.sh'`
ha_common.sh will be sourced in make_ha_upper.sh:  
```
source $init_path/ha_common.sh
```
### wait_for_active
Wait server 'hatestdb' to be changed to active mode on current node.  
If the server is changed to active to active mode whthin 120 seconds, the wait loop will break.   
Otherwise, this function will print "NOK: db server is not active after long time".  
This is usually used before we update data in hatestdb.

### wait_for_slave_active
Wait server 'hatestdb' to be changed to active mode on slave node.  
If the server is changed to active to active mode whthin 120 seconds, the wait loop will break.   
Otherwise, this function will print "NOK: db server is not active after long time".  
This is usually used after a failover.  

### run_on_slave
```
alias run_on_slave='${init_path}/../../common/script/run_remote_script -host $SLAVE_SERVER_IP -port $SLAVE_SERVER_SSH_PORT -user $SLAVE_SERVER_USER -password "$SLAVE_SERVER_PW"'
```
Examples:
```
run_on_slave -c "cubrid hb stop"
run_on_slave -c "grep 'Process event: Encountered an unrecoverable error and will shut itself down' $CUBRID/log/${dbname}@${masterHostName}_copylogdb.err | wc -l"
run_on_slave -c "cd $HOME; sh monitor_bug_11301.sh $dbname $masterHostName $port" > slave.log 2>&1
```
### run_download_on_slave
```
alias run_download_on_slave='${init_path}/../../common/script/run_download -host $SLAVE_SERVER_IP -port $SLAVE_SERVER_SSH_PORT -user $SLAVE_SERVER_USER -password "$SLAVE_SERVER_PW"'
```
Examples:
```
run_download_on_slave -from ~/slave.log -to ./
run_download_on_slave -from $CUBRID/log/hatestdb@${masterHostName}_copylogdb.err -to .
```

### run_upload_on_slave
```
alias run_upload_on_slave='${init_path}/../../common/script/run_upload -host $SLAVE_SERVER_IP -port $SLAVE_SERVER_SSH_PORT -user $SLAVE_SERVER_USER -password "$SLAVE_SERVER_PW"'
```
Examples:
```
run_upload_on_slave -from $CUBRID/conf/cubrid.conf -to $CUBRID/conf/
run_upload_on_slave -from ./monitor_bug_11301.sh -to $HOME/
```

## 5.5 Functions in make_ha_upper.sh or make_ha_lower.sh  

### setup_ha_environment  
`setup_ha_environment` is used to setup a HA environment which contains one master node, and one slave node.  
The current machine is used as the master node, and slave node is set in ~/CTP/shell/init_path/HA.properties.  
Example for HA.properties:  
```
##Configure HA enviorment.

MASTER_SERVER_IP = 192.168.1.83
MASTER_SERVER_USER = ha
MASTER_SERVER_PW = PASSWORD
MASTER_SERVER_SSH_PORT = 22
SLAVE_SERVER_IP = 192.168.1.93
SLAVE_SERVER_USER = ha
SLAVE_SERVER_PW = PASSWORD
SLAVE_SERVER_SSH_PORT = 22
#set port numbers according to different users
CUBRID_PORT_ID = 1568
HA_PORT_ID = 59907
MASTER_SHM_ID = 1568
BROKER_PORT1 = 30090
APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID1 = 30090
BROKER_PORT2 = 33091
APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID2 = 33091
CM_PORT = 8001
```
If we need to run a HA shell, we need configure `'HA.properties'` first.  
In regression test,  file `'HA.properties'` is configured by CTP.  
CTP read info from file `'~/CTP/conf/shell_runtime.conf'` on controller node, and set file `'$init_path/HA.properties'` on each master node. 

For example:  
File `'$init_path/HA.properties'` on node ha@192.168.1.83:
```
##Configure HA enviorment.

MASTER_SERVER_IP = 192.168.1.83
MASTER_SERVER_USER = ha
MASTER_SERVER_PW = PASSWORD
MASTER_SERVER_SSH_PORT = 22
SLAVE_SERVER_IP = 192.168.1.93
SLAVE_SERVER_USER = ha
SLAVE_SERVER_PW = PASSWORD
SLAVE_SERVER_SSH_PORT = 22
#set port numbers according to different users
CUBRID_PORT_ID = 1568
HA_PORT_ID = 59907
MASTER_SHM_ID = 1568
BROKER_PORT1 = 30090
APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID1 = 30090
BROKER_PORT2 = 33091
APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID2 = 33091
CM_PORT = 8001

```
This is depended on file `~/CTP/conf/shell_template.conf` on controller node:  


```
default.ssh.port=22
default.ssh.user=ha
default.ssh.pwd=uV9b3KMp5%%
default.cubrid.cubrid_port_id = 1568
default.broker1.BROKER_PORT = 30090
default.broker2.BROKER_PORT = 33091
default.broker1.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=30090
default.broker2.APPL_SERVER_SHM_ID=33091
default.ha.ha_port_id = 59907

#master node
env.83.ssh.host=192.168.1.83
#slave node
env.83.ssh.relatedhosts=192.168.1.93
...
```

### revert_ha_environment  
* Revert all the conf files to the original status on master node and slave node.
* Delete db on both nodes.

### wait_for_slave
`wait_for_slave` is used to wait the data replication finished on slave node.
If we need to check the data on slave node, we need to check the data after the data replication finished. So this function is required.

### wait_for_slave_failover  
When a failover occurs, we need use function `wait_for_slave_failover` to wait the new slave node (previous master node) to finish the data replication before we check the data.

### format_hb_status
`format_hb_status` is used to format the hostname, process id, path for 'cubrid hb status' output.  
Usage:
```
cubrid hb status > test.log
format_hb_status test.log
```
Before format:
```
$ cat test.log 

 HA-Node Info (current func09, state master)
   Node func19 (priority 2, state slave)
   Node func09 (priority 1, state master)


 HA-Process Info (master 12167, state master)
   Applylogdb hatestdb@localhost:/home/ha/CUBRID/databases/hatestdb_func19 (pid 12407, state registered)
   Copylogdb hatestdb@func19:/home/ha/CUBRID/databases/hatestdb_func19 (pid 12405, state registered)
   Server hatestdb (pid 12175, state registered_and_active)

@ cubrid heartbeat status
```
After format:
```
$ cat test.log             

 HA-Node Info (current host1, state master)
   Node host2 (priority 2, state slave)
   Node host1 (priority 1, state master)


 HA-Process Info (master , state master)
   Applylogdb hatestdb@localhost:CUBRID/databases/hatestdb_host2 (pid , state registered)
   Copylogdb hatestdb@host2:CUBRID/databases/hatestdb_host2 (pid , state registered)
   Server hatestdb (pid , state registered_and_active)

@ cubrid heartbeat status
```
### add_ha_db
`add_ha_db` is used to add new database after `setup_ha_environment`.  
* Create database on master node and slave node.  
* Add the database name in ha_db_list in $CUBRID/conf/cubrid_ha.conf  
* Restart the heartbeat on both nodes  
Example:  
Three databases will be created in this case: tdb01, tdb02 and tdb03. 
```
#!/bin/bash

. $init_path/init.sh
init test

. $init_path/make_ha.sh
dbname=tdb01
setup_ha_environment
add_ha_db tdb02 tdb03
```
